Add release notes for 0.290 (#23936)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.290.rst

* Upgraded commons-codec to version 1.17.0 :pr:`23868`.
* Upgraded commons-compress to version 1.26.2 :pr:`23868`.
* Upgraded commons-io to version 2.16.0 :pr:`23794`.
* Upgraded commons-io to version 2.16.1 :pr:`23868`.
* Upgraded commons-lang3 to version 3.14.0 :pr:`23868`.
* Upgraded protobuf-java to version 3.25.5 :pr:`23797`.
* Upgraded protobuf-java-util to version 3.25.5 :pr:`23797`.

Security Changes
________________
* Upgrade Postgres JDBC Driver to 42.6.1 :pr:`23710`.

Hive Connector Changes
______________________
* Fix interpretation of ambiguous timestamps inside array, map, or row types for tables using TEXTFILE format to interpret the timestamps as the earliest possible unixtime for consistency with the rest of Presto.
* Fix timestamps inside array, map, or row types for tables using TEXTFILE format to respect the ``hive.time-zone property``.

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________
* Fix time-type columns to return properly when ``iceberg.parquet-batch-read-optimization-enabled`` is set to ``TRUE``. :pr:`23542`.
* Fix to reduce drop time for Iceberg tables with deleted metadata in S3 storage. :pr:`23510`.
* Add Iceberg metadata table $ref :pr:`23503`.

> * Add configuration property ``iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.scope`` for OAUTH2 authentication in Iceberg's REST catalog :pr:`23884`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add configuration property ``iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.scope`` for OAUTH2 authentication in Iceberg's REST catalog. :pr:`23884`
```

> * Add iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.uri configurable property :pr:`23739`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add configuration property ``iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.uri``. :pr:`23739`
```

> * Add procedure `rollback_to_timestamp` to rollback an iceberg table to a given point in time. :pr:`23559`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add procedure ``rollback_to_timestamp`` to rollback an Iceberg table to a given point in time. :pr:`23559`
```

> * Add support of UUID-typed columns :pr:`23627`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support of UUID-typed columns. :pr:`23627`
```

> * Add support to query Iceberg table by branch/tag name :pr:`23539`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support to query Iceberg table by branch/tag name. :pr:`23539`
```

> * Add table property `metrics_max_inferred_column` to configure the max columns number for which metrics are collected, and support `metrics_max_inferred_column` for Iceberg table with `PARQUET` format :pr:`23468`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add table property ``metrics_max_inferred_column`` to configure the max columns number for which metrics are collected, and support ``metrics_max_inferred_column`` for Iceberg tables with `PARQUET` format. :pr:`23468`
```

> * Support procedure fast_forward for iceberg :pr:`23589`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for procedure ``fast_forward`` for Iceberg. :pr:`23589`
```
Rephrased to follow the phrasing in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes) in the Release Notes Guidelines. Please review my rephrasing for accuracy.

Rephrasing may mean this entry should be moved to follow the sequence in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes).

* Support timestamp without timezone in time travel expressions :pr:`23714`.

> * Support using named arguments in procedure `register_table` and `unregister_table` :pr:`12345`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for using named arguments in procedure `register_table` and `unregister_table` :pr:`23592`.
```
Rephrased to follow the phrasing in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes) in the Release Notes Guidelines. Please review my rephrasing for accuracy.

Rephrasing may mean this entry should be moved to follow the sequence in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes).

MongoDB Connector Changes
_________________________

> * Support varbinary data type in MongoDB (pr:`23386`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for ``varbinary`` data type in MongoDB. :pr:`23386`
```
Rephrased to follow the phrasing in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes) in the Release Notes Guidelines. Please review my rephrasing for accuracy.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Mongodb Connector Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> _________________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Add support for MongoDB ``ALTER TABLE`` statement. :pr:`23266`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for MongoDB ``ALTER TABLE`` statement. :pr:`23266`
```

SPI Changes
___________

> * Add ``Partitioning``, ``PartitioningScheme``, ``PartitioningHandle``, ``PlanFragmentId``, ``StageExecutionDescriptor`` and ``SimplePlanFragment`` to the SPI . :pr:`23601`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``Partitioning``, ``PartitioningScheme``, ``PartitioningHandle``, ``PlanFragmentId``, ``StageExecutionDescriptor`` and ``SimplePlanFragment`` to the SPI. :pr:`23601`
```

Elasticsearch Changes
_____________________

> * Improve handling of exceptions for empty tables in Elasticsearch :pr:`23850`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve handling of exceptions for empty tables in Elasticsearch. :pr:`23850`
```

> Orc/dwrf Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ORC/DWRF Changes
```
Capitalization for consistency with line 92. 

This heading does not appear in the [Order of sections](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-sections) in the Release Notes Guidelines. I don't think that automatically makes it wrong, but I ask that other reviewers consider if this entry more properly belongs in **General Changes** or maybe another section in the Release Notes.

________________

> * Fix a data corruption in uncompressed ORC/DWRF files with large values in string/binary columns :pr:`23760`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix a data corruption in uncompressed ORC/DWRF files with large values in string/binary columns. :pr:`23760`
```

> Prestissimo (native Execution) Changes

Reviewer: Following the [Order of sections](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-sections), this heading should be the first section after **General Changes**.

______________________________________

> * Add ``native_max_local_exchange_partition_count session`` property. :pr:`23910`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add ``native_max_local_exchange_partition_count`` session property. :pr:`23910`
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Presto Iceberg Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ______________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Add test for logical type storage in parquet files :pr:`23388`.

Reviewer: Suggest deleting the three lines before this line to remove the `Presto Iceberg Changes` header, and this line should be moved to the `Iceberg Connector Changes` section.

> * Add test for logical type storage in parquet files :pr:`23388`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add test for logical type storage in Parquet files. :pr:`23388`
```

> Presto Parquet Changes

Reviewer: This heading does not appear in the [Order of sections](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-sections) in the Release Notes Guidelines. I don't think that automatically makes it wrong, but I ask that other reviewers consider if the entry under this heading more properly belongs in General Changes or maybe another section in the Release Notes. If the entry _Fix bug so..._ is moved, delete this **Presto Parquet Changes** heading.

Reviewer 2: I would merge this into Hive and Iceberg sections (just duplicate for each).

Author: This was generated by the script? Why should we move it to other sections? I think keeping the parquet and orc changes separate allow for better readability since those are the high risk changes typically

**Details**
===========

General Changes
_______________
* Fix :func:`array_intersect` for single parameter array<array<T>> to be deterministic regardless of the order of null input. :pr:`23890`
* Fix bug in local property calculation when spill is enabled. :pr:`23922`
* Fix bug to unescape like pattern and validate escape string with no unresolved value. :pr:`23456`
* Fix to query and filter using Iceberg metadata columns ``$path`` and ``$data_sequence_number``. :pr:`23472`
* Fix nullability of columns in information schema. :pr:`23577`
* Fix distinct operator for UUID type. :pr:`23732`
* Improve ``element_at`` by avoiding pushdown of negative position for ``element_at`` for array.  :pr:`23479`
* Improve ``GET /v1/info/state`` to return INACTIVE state until the resource group configuration manager is fully initialized. :pr:`23585`
* Improve JoinPrefilter optimizer for wide join keys and multiple join keys. :pr:`23858`
* Improve writer scaling in skewed conditions by setting ``optimized_scale_writer_producer_buffer`` to ``on`` by default. :pr:`23774`
* Add UUID type support to the Parquet reader and writer. :pr:`23627`

> * Add a configurable-sized cache for Iceberg table puffin files to improve query planning time controlled by the  ``iceberg.max-statistics-file-cache-size`` configuration property. :pr:`23177`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add a configurable-sized cache for Iceberg table Puffin files to improve query planning time.  This feature is controlled by the  ``iceberg.max-statistics-file-cache-size`` configuration property. :pr:`23177`
```

> * Add a flag to the Presto CLI which allows skipping SSL certificate verification. :pr:`23780`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add ``--insecure`` flag to the Presto CLI which allows skipping SSL certificate verification. :pr:`23780`
```

* Add support in QueuedStatement protocol to accept pre-minted query id and slug. :pr:`23407`
* Add support to proxy AuthorizedIdentity using JWT. :pr:`23546`
* Add support for casting ``char`` datatype to various numeric datatypes. :pr:`23792`
* Replace configuration property ``async-cache-full-persistence-interval`` with ``async-cache-persistence-interval``. :pr:`23626`
* Remove ``array_dupes`` and ``array_has_dupes`` alias names from functions :func:`array_duplicates` and :func:`array_has_duplicates`. :pr:`23762`

Presto C++ Changes
______________________________________
* Fix ``task.writer-count`` and ``task.partitioned-writer-count`` configuration properties in Presto C++ for consistency with Presto. :pr:`23902`
* Fix a bug where users weren't able to set the ``native_expression.max_array_size_in_reduce`` session property. :pr:`23856`
* Fix plan validation failures for some join queries running with spill enabled when using Presto C++. :pr:`23595`
* Improve arbitrator configs to use the new string-based format. :pr:`23496`
* Add ``$path`` and ``$bucket`` to split info, and fixed the split counts in the coordinator UI. :pr:`23755`

> * Add configurable chunk size in ChunkedSliceOutput, reducing total memory usage by nearly 3x and per-object memory by 4x with a 1kB chunk size (default 8kB). :pr:`23707`

Reviewer 2: I tried to understand how to toggle this, as it's written it's hard to understand how this relates to an operator of Presto. I recommend removing it or asking clarification from the author.

Author: Okay i asked the author didn't get a response yet. Won't want to block release notes for a PR. Also I think keeping in release notes is better if the people actually want to dig into code and see which operator it benefits but I am removing this entry

Reviewer 2: Ideally this should be caught by whoever reviewed the PR.  Let's remove it if it can't be easily described as a user-facing feature.  CC: @chenyangfb @sdruzkin

* Add function :func:`ip_prefix_subnets` that splits the input prefix into subnets the size of the new prefix length. :pr:`23656`
* Add new configuration property ``eager-plan-validation-enabled`` for eager building of validation of a logical plan before queuing. :pr:`23649`
* Add Presto icon to .idea. :pr:`23579`
* Add session property ``inline_projections_on_values`` and configuration property ``optimizer.inline-projections-on-values`` to evaluate project node on values node. :pr:`23245`
* Add support in QueuedStatement protocol to accept pre-minted query id and slug. :pr:`23407`
* Add support to proxy AuthorizedIdentity using JWT. :pr:`23546`
* Add support for casting ``char`` datatype to various numeric datatypes. :pr:`23792`
* Add a new NodeManager ``PluginNodeManager``. :pr:`23863`
* Replace configuration property ``async-cache-full-persistence-interval`` with ``async-cache-persistence-interval``. :pr:`23626`
* Remove ``array_dupes`` and ``array_has_dupes`` alias names from functions :func:`array_duplicates` and :func:`array_has_duplicates`. :pr:`23762`
* Improve ``element_at`` by avoiding pushdown of negative position for ``element_at`` for array.  :pr:`23479`

> * Improve GET `/v1/info/state` to return INACTIVE state until the resource group configuration manager is fully initialized. :pr:`23585`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve ``GET /v1/info/state`` to return INACTIVE state until the resource group configuration manager is fully initialized. :pr:`23585`
```

Presto C++ (Native Execution) Changes
______________________________________
* Fix ``task.writer-count`` and ``task.partitioned-writer-count`` configuration properties in Presto C++ for consistency with Presto. :pr:`23902`
* Fix a bug where users weren't able to set the ``native_expression.max_array_size_in_reduce`` session property. :pr:`23856`
* Fix plan validation failures for some join queries running with spill enabled when using Presto C++. :pr:`23595`
* Improve I/O and CPU usage by merging FilterNode into TableScanNode where possible. Also, added ``$path`` and ``$bucket`` to split info, and fixed the split counts in the coordinator UI. :pr:`23755`
* Improve arbitrator configs to use the new string-based format. :pr:`23496`
* Add test for logical type storage in Parquet files. :pr:`23388`
* Add a metric ``presto_cpp.memory_pushback_expected_reduction_bytes`` to track expected reduction in memory after a pushback attempt. :pr:`23872`
* Add a new counter, presto_cpp.memory_pushback_reduction_bytes, to monitor the actual memory reduction achieved with each memory pushback attempt. :pr:`23813`

> * Allow setting chunk size in ChunkedSliceOutput, it can reduce memory in the cases of large number of small output buffer. :pr:`23707`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve setting buffer chunk size in ChunkedSliceOutput, which can reduce memory in the cases of large number of small output buffers. :pr:`23707`
```
Suggested revision to follow the phrasing in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes) of the Release Notes Guidelines. 

I read the original #23707 and I think this is good, but please review for accuracy. 

NOTE: Because of the revision, please move this entry to adjacent to lines 56-57 "Improve I/O.." and "Improve arbitrator...".

Author: Allow is better since it cleary conveys what was done

* Add session property: 'native_max_output_buffer_size' which specifies the maximum size in bytes for the task's buffered output. The buffer is shared among all drivers. :pr:`23853`
* Migrated arbitrator configs to use the new string-based format. :pr:`23496 `

> * Merged FilterNode into TableScanNode where possible, reducing I/O and CPU; added $path and $bucket to split info, and fixed split counts in coordinator UI. `:pr:23755`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve I/O and CPU usage by merging FilterNode into TableScanNode where possible. Also, added ``$path`` and ``$bucket`` to split info, and fixed the split counts in the coordinator UI. :pr:`23755`
```
Fix formatting of PR tag. 

Suggested revision to follow the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes) in the Release Notes Guidelines. 

Note: Please review my suggested wording for accuracy - I read the original PR and think I described it correctly, but I want someone else to review this.

> * Fix a bug where users weren't able to set `native_expression.max_array_size_in_reduce` session property. :pr:`23856`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix a bug where users weren't able to set the ``native_expression.max_array_size_in_reduce`` session property. :pr:`23856`
```

* Add incremental periodic cache persistence for Presto C++ worker. :pr:`23626`
* Fix plan validation failures for some join queries running with spill enabled when using Presto C++. :pr:`23595`
* Add native system session property provider. :pr:`23045`

Security Changes
________________
* Upgrade Postgres JDBC Driver to 42.6.1. :pr:`23710`

> * Upgrade the logback-core version to 1.2.13 :pr:`23735`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade the logback-core version to 1.2.13. :pr:`23735`
```

* Fix timestamps inside array, map, or row types for tables using ``TEXTFILE`` format to respect the ``hive.time-zone property``. :pr:`23593`

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________
* Fix time-type columns to return properly when ``iceberg.parquet-batch-read-optimization-enabled`` is set to ``TRUE``. :pr:`23542`
* Fix to reduce drop time for Iceberg tables with deleted metadata in S3 storage. :pr:`23510`
* Add Iceberg metadata table ``$ref``. :pr:`23503`
* Add configuration property ``iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.scope`` for OAUTH2 authentication in Iceberg's REST catalog. :pr:`23884`
* Add configuration property ``iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.uri``. :pr:`23739`
* Add procedure ``rollback_to_timestamp`` to rollback an Iceberg table to a given point in time. :pr:`23559`
* Add support of UUID-typed columns. :pr:`23627`
* Add support to query Iceberg table by branch/tag name. :pr:`23539`
* Add table property ``metrics_max_inferred_column`` to configure the max columns number for which metrics are collected, and support ``metrics_max_inferred_column`` for Iceberg tables with `PARQUET` format. :pr:`23468`
* Add support for procedure ``fast_forward`` for Iceberg. :pr:`23589`

> * Support timestamp without timezone in time travel expressions :pr:`23714`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support timestamp without timezone in time travel expressions. :pr:`23714`.
```

> * Add support for using named arguments in procedure `register_table` and `unregister_table` :pr:`23592`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for using named arguments in procedure `register_table` and `unregister_table`. :pr:`23592`.
```

> * Support new procedure set_current_snapshot for Iceberg :pr:`23567`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support new procedure `set_current_snapshot` for Iceberg. :pr:`23567`
```
Should procedures be formatted with `` like "types, SQL keywords and configuration properties" are, as mentioned in [Formatting](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#formatting) in the Release Note Guidelines? 

If yes, then please change the formatting in the previous line "Add support for using named arguments in procedure register_table and unregister_table [#23592](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/23592)."

> * Support timestamp without timezone in time travel expressions. :pr:`23714`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support timestamp without timezone in time travel expressions. :pr:`23714`
```

MongoDB Connector Changes
_________________________
* Add support for ``varbinary`` data type in MongoDB. :pr:`23386`
* Add support for MongoDB ``ALTER TABLE`` statement. :pr:`23266`

Cassandra Connector Changes
___________________________

> * Upgrade cassandra-driver-core to 3.11.5 for SSL support :pr:23493

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upgrade cassandra-driver-core to 3.11.5 for SSL support. :pr:`23493`
```

> Elasticsearch Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elasticsearch Connector Changes
```

> _____________________

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_______________________________
```
I should have caught this when I suggested changing the text in line 105 from `Elasticsearch Changes` to `Elasticsearch Connector Changes` - the length of the formatting line and the text it formats should match.

* Improve handling of exceptions for empty tables in Elasticsearch. :pr:`23850`

ORC/DWRF Changes
________________
* Fix a data corruption in uncompressed ORC/DWRF files with large values in string/binary columns. :pr:`23760`

Presto Parquet Changes
______________________

> * Fix bug so that proper logical type parameters are now read and written to Parquet files :pr:`23388`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix bug so that proper logical type parameters are now read and written to Parquet files. :pr:`23388`
```

=============
Release 0.290
=============

**Highlights**
==============

> 

Reviewer: The only thing left is for someone to write any needed entries in **Highlights**.

* Add a new counter, presto_cpp.memory_pushback_reduction_bytes, to monitor the actual memory reduction achieved with each memory pushback attempt. :pr:`23813`
* Add ``native_max_local_exchange_partition_count`` session property which maps to the ``max_local_exchange_partition_count`` velox query property introduced in facebookincubator/velox#11292. :pr:`23910`
* Add session property: ``native_writer_flush_threshold_bytes`` which specifies the minimum memory footprint size required to reclaim memory from a file writer by flushing its buffered data to disk. :pr:`23891`
* Add session property: ``native_max_page_partitioning_buffer_size`` which specifies the maximum bytes to buffer per PartitionedOutput operator to avoid creating tiny SerializedPages. :pr:`23853`
* Add session property: ``native_max_output_buffer_size`` which specifies the maximum size in bytes for the task's buffered output. The buffer is shared among all drivers. :pr:`23853`
* Add incremental periodic cache persistence for Presto C++ worker. :pr:`23626`
* Add native system session property provider. :pr:`23045`
* Remove session property ``native_join_spiller_partition_bits``. :pr:`23906`

> * Reverted merging of FilterNode into TableScanNode done in pr `23755`. :pr:`23755`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Revert merging of ``FilterNode`` into ``TableScanNode`` done in :pr:`23755`. :pr:`23855`
```
Nit of formatting, fix link to PR 23755, correct end link to PR 23855. 
 
Note: I'll mention that "Revert" is not in the [Order of changes](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/wiki/Release-Notes-Guidelines#order-of-changes) in the Release Notes Guidelines, which may mean that we need to add "Revert" to the Order of changes.

=============
Release 0.290
=============

**Highlights**
==============
* Fix plan validation failures for some join queries running with spill enabled when using Presto C++. :pr:`23595`
* Fix to reduce drop time for Iceberg tables with deleted metadata in S3 storage. :pr:`23510`
* Fix a data corruption in uncompressed ORC/DWRF files with large values in string/binary columns. :pr:`23760`

> * Improve security with upgrades to the Postgres JDBC driver (to 42.6.1) and the logback-core version (to 1.2.13). `:pr:23710`, `:pr:23735`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve security with upgrades to the Postgres JDBC driver (to 42.6.1) and the logback-core version (to 1.2.13). :pr:`23710`, :pr:`23735`
```

* Improve JoinPrefilter optimizer for wide join keys and multiple join keys. :pr:`23858`

> * Add new session properties, including `native_max_spill_bytes`, `native_max_partial_aggregation_memory`, and `native_max_extended_partial_aggregation_memory`, to optimize memory usage in Presto C++. :pr:23527

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add new session properties, including ``native_max_spill_bytes``, ``native_max_partial_aggregation_memory``, and ``native_max_extended_partial_aggregation_memory``, to optimize memory usage in Presto C++. :pr:`23527`
```

> * Fix plan validation failures for some join queries running with spill enabled when using Presto C++. :pr:`23595`
> * Fix to reduce drop time for Iceberg tables with deleted metadata in S3 storage. :pr:`23510`
> * Fix a data corruption in uncompressed ORC/DWRF files with large values in string/binary columns. :pr:`23760`
> * Improve security with upgrades to the Postgres JDBC driver (to 42.6.1) and the logback-core version (to 1.2.13). :pr:`23710`, :pr:`23735`
> * Improve JoinPrefilter optimizer for wide join keys and multiple join keys. :pr:`23858`
> * Add new session properties, including ``native_max_spill_bytes``, ``native_max_partial_aggregation_memory``, and ``native_max_extended_partial_aggregation_memory``, to optimize memory usage in Presto C++. :pr:`23527`
> * Add UUID type support to the Parquet reader and writer. :pr:`23627`
> * Add a configurable-sized cache for Iceberg table puffin files to improve query planning time controlled by the  ``iceberg.max-statistics-file-cache-size`` configuration property. :pr:`23177`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix to reduce drop time for Iceberg tables with deleted metadata in S3 storage. :pr:`23510`
* Improve JoinPrefilter optimizer for wide join keys and multiple join keys. :pr:`23858`
* Add UUID type support to the Parquet reader and writer. :pr:`23627`
* Add a configurable-sized cache for Iceberg table puffin files to improve query planning time controlled by the  ``iceberg.max-statistics-file-cache-size`` configuration property. :pr:`23177`
```

IMO some of the highlights should be removed.

**Details**
===========

General Changes
_______________
* Fix :func:`array_intersect` for single parameter array<array<T>> to be deterministic regardless of the order of null input. :pr:`23890`
* Fix bug in local property calculation when spill is enabled. :pr:`23922`
* Fix bug to unescape like pattern and validate escape string with no unresolved value. :pr:`23456`
* Fix to query and filter using Iceberg metadata columns ``$path`` and ``$data_sequence_number``. :pr:`23472`
* Fix nullability of columns in information schema. :pr:`23577`
* Fix distinct operator for UUID type. :pr:`23732`
* Improve ``element_at`` by avoiding pushdown of negative position for ``element_at`` for array.  :pr:`23479`
* Improve ``GET /v1/info/state`` to return INACTIVE state until the resource group configuration manager is fully initialized. :pr:`23585`

> * Improve IcebergDistributedSmokeTestBase by making it abstract. :pr:`23580`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* Add a configurable-sized cache for Iceberg table puffin files to improve query planning time controlled by the  ``iceberg.max-statistics-file-cache-size`` configuration property. :pr:`23177`
* Add a flag to the Presto CLI which allows skipping SSL certificate verification. :pr:`23780`
* Add a session property ``native_max_extended_partial_aggregation_memory`` which specifies Presto native max partial aggregation memory when data reduction is optimal. :pr:`23527`
* Add a session property ``native_max_partial_aggregation_memory`` which specifies Presto native max partial aggregation memory when data reduction is not optimal. :pr:`23527`
* Add a session property ``native_max_spill_bytes`` which specifies Presto native max allowed spill bytes. :pr:`23527`
* Add function :func:`is_private_ip` that returns true when the input IP address is private or a reserved IP address. :pr:`23520`
* Add function :func:`ip_prefix_subnets` that splits the input prefix into subnets the size of the new prefix length. :pr:`23656`
* Add new configuration property ``eager-plan-validation-enabled`` for eager building of validation of a logical plan before queuing. :pr:`23649`

> * Add Presto icon to .idea. :pr:`23579`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* Add session property ``inline_projections_on_values`` and configuration property ``optimizer.inline-projections-on-values`` to evaluate project node on values node. :pr:`23245`
* Add support in QueuedStatement protocol to accept pre-minted query id and slug. :pr:`23407`
* Add support to proxy AuthorizedIdentity using JWT. :pr:`23546`
* Add support for casting ``char`` datatype to various numeric datatypes. :pr:`23792`

> * Add a new NodeManager ``PluginNodeManager``. :pr:`23863`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* Replace configuration property ``async-cache-full-persistence-interval`` with ``async-cache-persistence-interval``. :pr:`23626`
* Remove ``array_dupes`` and ``array_has_dupes`` alias names from functions :func:`array_duplicates` and :func:`array_has_duplicates`. :pr:`23762`

> * Upgrade avro to version 1.11.4. :pr:`23868`
> * Upgrade commons-codec to version 1.17.0. :pr:`23868`
> * Upgrade commons-compress to version 1.26.2. :pr:`23868`
> * Upgrade commons-io to version 2.16.0. :pr:`23794`
> * Upgrade commons-io to version 2.16.1. :pr:`23868`
> * Upgrade commons-lang3 to version 3.14.0. :pr:`23868`
> * Upgrade protobuf-java to version 3.25.5. :pr:`23797`
> * Upgrade protobuf-java-util to version 3.25.5. :pr:`23797`
> * Upgrade to centralize dependency versions in the parent pom.xml from presto-cassandra/pom.xml for consistency and ease of maintenance.  :pr:`23818`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Presto C++ (Native Execution) Changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Presto C++ Changes
```

______________________________________
* Fix ``task.writer-count`` and ``task.partitioned-writer-count`` configuration properties in Presto C++ for consistency with Presto. :pr:`23902`
* Fix a bug where users weren't able to set the ``native_expression.max_array_size_in_reduce`` session property. :pr:`23856`
* Fix plan validation failures for some join queries running with spill enabled when using Presto C++. :pr:`23595`

> * Improve I/O and CPU usage by merging FilterNode into TableScanNode where possible. Also, added ``$path`` and ``$bucket`` to split info, and fixed the split counts in the coordinator UI. :pr:`23755`

Reviewer 2: This sounds like two different bullets.

> * Improve I/O and CPU usage by merging FilterNode into TableScanNode where possible. Also, added ``$path`` and ``$bucket`` to split info, and fixed the split counts in the coordinator UI. :pr:`23755`

Reviewer 2: Looks like this is reverted in 77, let's remove.

Author: this pr does 3 things and one is reverted

Reviewer 2: OK, then let's rephrase to just the thing that was kept.

* Improve arbitrator configs to use the new string-based format. :pr:`23496`

> * Improve setting buffer chunk size in ChunkedSliceOutput, which can reduce memory in the cases of large number of small output buffers. :pr:`23707`

Reviewer 2: Let's think of a way to phrase this that makes sense to an end user, feel free to ask the original author to help.

Author: `Allow setting chunk size in ChunkedSliceOutput, it can reduce memory in the cases of large number of small output buffer`
was the initial release notes which makes more sense, I think i inadvertently merged a suggestion

> * Add test for logical type storage in Parquet files. :pr:`23388`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* Add a metric ``presto_cpp.memory_pushback_expected_reduction_bytes`` to track expected reduction in memory after a pushback attempt. :pr:`23872`

> * Add a new counter, presto_cpp.memory_pushback_reduction_bytes, to monitor the actual memory reduction achieved with each memory pushback attempt. :pr:`23813`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add a new counter, ``presto_cpp.memory_pushback_reduction_bytes``, to monitor the actual memory reduction achieved with each memory pushback attempt. :pr:`23813`
```

> * Add ``native_max_local_exchange_partition_count`` session property which maps to the ``max_local_exchange_partition_count`` velox query property introduced in facebookincubator/velox#11292. :pr:`23910`

Reviewer 2: We should not reference the Velox PR and instead just say what the outcome of setting this session property is.

* Add session property: ``native_writer_flush_threshold_bytes`` which specifies the minimum memory footprint size required to reclaim memory from a file writer by flushing its buffered data to disk. :pr:`23891`
* Add session property: ``native_max_page_partitioning_buffer_size`` which specifies the maximum bytes to buffer per PartitionedOutput operator to avoid creating tiny SerializedPages. :pr:`23853`
* Add session property: ``native_max_output_buffer_size`` which specifies the maximum size in bytes for the task's buffered output. The buffer is shared among all drivers. :pr:`23853`
* Add incremental periodic cache persistence for Presto C++ worker. :pr:`23626`
* Add native system session property provider. :pr:`23045`
* Remove session property ``native_join_spiller_partition_bits``. :pr:`23906`
* Revert merging of ``FilterNode`` into ``TableScanNode`` done in :pr:`23755`. :pr:`23855`

> Security Changes

Reviewer 2: I'd try to reference CVEs that have been addressed.  If that's too hard, let's just remove this section.

________________
* Upgrade Postgres JDBC Driver to 42.6.1. :pr:`23710`
* Upgrade the logback-core version to 1.2.13. :pr:`23735`

Hive Connector Changes
______________________
* Fix interpretation of ambiguous timestamps inside array, map, or row types for tables using ``TEXTFILE`` format to interpret the timestamps as the earliest possible unixtime for consistency with the rest of Presto. :pr:`23593`
* Fix timestamps inside array, map, or row types for tables using ``TEXTFILE`` format to respect the ``hive.time-zone property``. :pr:`23593`

Iceberg Connector Changes
_________________________
* Fix time-type columns to return properly when ``iceberg.parquet-batch-read-optimization-enabled`` is set to ``TRUE``. :pr:`23542`
* Fix to reduce drop time for Iceberg tables with deleted metadata in S3 storage. :pr:`23510`
* Add Iceberg metadata table ``$ref``. :pr:`23503`
* Add configuration property ``iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.scope`` for OAUTH2 authentication in Iceberg's REST catalog. :pr:`23884`
* Add configuration property ``iceberg.rest.auth.oauth2.uri``. :pr:`23739`
* Add procedure ``rollback_to_timestamp`` to rollback an Iceberg table to a given point in time. :pr:`23559`

> * Add support of UUID-typed columns. :pr:`23627`

Reviewer 2: This could be a highlight

> * Add support to query Iceberg table by branch/tag name. :pr:`23539`

Reviewer 2: This could be a highlight

* Add table property ``metrics_max_inferred_column`` to configure the max columns number for which metrics are collected, and support ``metrics_max_inferred_column`` for Iceberg tables with `PARQUET` format. :pr:`23468`
* Add support for procedure ``fast_forward`` for Iceberg. :pr:`23589`

> * Add support for using named arguments in procedures ``register_table`` and ``unregister_table``. :pr:`23592`

Reviewer 2: These could be highlights
